---
author: >
    Demyanenko, Alexander V. and Bogomolov, Alexandr S. and Dozmorov, Nikolay V. and Svyatova, Alexandra I. 
    and Pyryaeva, Alexandra P. and Goldort, Veniamin G. and Kochubei, Sergei A. and Baklanov, Alexey V.
title: "Reply to Comments on “Singlet Oxygen <sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub> in Photocatalysis on TiO<sub>2</sub>. Where Does It Come from?”"
journal: "The Journal of Physical Chemistry C"
volume: "XXX"
issue: "X"
pages: "XXXX - XXXX"
year: "2019"
doi: "10.1021/acs.jpcc.9b09500"
members:
  - a-demyanenko
  - a-bogomolov
  - n-dozmorov
  - a-pyryaeva
  - s-kochubei
  - a-baklanov
researchProjects:
  - gas-phase-approach-to-heterogeneous-photocatalysis
  - weakly-bound-oxygen-complexes-as-a-new-source-of-singlet-oxygen
---
In the Comment the authors Y. Nosaka and A. Y. Nosaka present arguments against the mechanism of singlet oxygen 
production which was suggested in the earlier published paper (Demyanenko et al., J. Phys. Chem. C 2019, 123, 2175) 
to explain the experimental data for the Near IR (NIR)-luminescence observed to appear after laser excitation 
at 355 nm of TiO<sub>2</sub> suspension in air-saturated solvents CCl<sub>4</sub> and H<sub>2</sub>O. The main 
arguments of the Comment are directed against Assignment of the NIR Emission and Electron Photodetachment Mechanism 
suggested by Demyanenko et al.. Particularly the Comment claims that the red shift (near 30 nm) and bandwidth (50-60 nm) 
of the NIR luminescence observed in paper by Demyanenko et al. are too large to be assigned to the luminescence 
of singlet oxygen <sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub>. In the Reply it is shown that several arguments of the Comment are based 
on the incorrect statements. The current interpretation of the nature of the red shift and bandwidth of the luminescence 
of singlet oxygen governed by interaction with the environment is considered. It is shown that the characteristics 
of NIR luminescence (rather large red shift and bandwidth as compared with the literature data for the luminescence 
of <sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub> in solutions) observed in experiments by Demyanenko et al. are in a qualitative agreement 
with expected tendencies.  All the arguments of the Comment are considered in detail and extended reply is given.
