---
author: "Vidma, Konstantin V. and Parker, David H. and Bogdanchikov, Georgii A. and Baklanov, Alexey V. and Kochubei, Sergei A."
title: "Ionic Pathways following UV Photoexcitation of the (HI)<sub>2</sub> van der Waals Dimer"
journal: "The Journal of Physical Chemistry A"
volume: "114"
issue: "9"
pages: "3067-3073"
year: "2010"
doi: "10.1021/jp9067679"
members: 
  - a-baklanov
---
Photodissociation of the (HI)<sub>2</sub> van der Waals dimers at 248 nm and nearby wavelengths has been studied using 
time-of-flight mass spectrometry and velocity map imaging. I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> product ions with a translational 
temperature of 130 K and “translationally hot” I<sup>+</sup> ions with an average kinetic energy 
of <i>E</i><sub>t</sub> = 1.24 ± 0.03 eV and angular anisotropy β = 1.92 ± 0.11 were detected as dimer-specific ionic 
photofragments. Velocity map images of the I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> and I<sup>+</sup> species were found to be qualitatively 
similar to those observed in the case of photoexcitation of the (CH<sub>3</sub>I)<sub>2</sub> 
dimer (<i>J. Chem. Phys.</i><b>2005</b>, <i>122</i>, 204301). As in the case of the (CH<sub>3</sub>I)<sub>2</sub> dimer, 
the absence of neutral I<sub>2</sub>-specific features in the ionic species images from (HI)<sub>2</sub> allows us 
to eliminate neutral molecular I<sub>2</sub> as a precursor of I<sup>+</sup> and I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup>. 
Similar to the case of (CH<sub>3</sub>I)<sub>2</sub>, we deduce that the observed I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> ions are 
produced in their <sup>2</sup>Π<sub>3/2,g</sub> ground electronic state as a result of photodissociation of the ionized 
dimer (HI)<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> + <i>h</i>ν → I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> + .... The formation of “translationally hot” 
I<sup>+</sup> ions is attributed to photodissociation of nascent vibrationally excited I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> with 
an average vibrational energy of 1.05 ± 0.10 eV. This vibrational excitation is explained by the nonequilibrium initial 
I−I distance in I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> arising in photodissociation of (HI)<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> after prompt 
release of the light H atoms. On the basis of our ab initio calculated value for the I−I distance of (3.17 Å) in 
the (HI)<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> precursor dimer, the vibrational excitation of I<sub>2</sub><sup>+</sup> is 
expected to be 1.02 eV, which is in quantitative agreement with our experimentally deduced value. The interpretation 
of our results was supported by ab initio calculations of the structure and energy of neutral and ionized dimers of HI at the MP4(SDTQ)//MP2 level.
