---
author: "Vidma, Konstantin V. and Frederix, Pim W. J. M. and Parker, David H. and Baklanov, Alexey V."
title: "Photodissociation of van der Waals clusters of isoprene with oxygen, C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>-O<sub>2</sub>, in the wavelength range 213–277 nm"
journal: "The Journal of Chemical Physics"
volume: "137"
issue: "5"
pages: "054305"
year: "2012"
doi: "10.1063/1.4737856"
members: 
  - a-baklanov
---
The speed and angular distribution of O atoms arising from the photofragmentation 
of C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub>, the isoprene-oxygen van der Waals complex, in the wavelength 
region of 213&ndash;277 nm has been studied with the use of a two-color dissociation-probe method and the velocity 
map imaging technique. Dramatic enhancement in the O atoms photo-generation cross section in comparison with 
the photodissociation of individual O<sub>2</sub> molecules has been observed. Velocity map images of 
these &ldquo;enhanced&rdquo; O atoms consisted of five channels, different in their kinetic energy, 
angular distribution, and wavelength dependence. Three channels are deduced to be due to the one-quantum excitation 
of the C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> complex into the perturbed Herzberg III 
state (<sup>3</sup>&Delta;<sub>u</sub>) of O<sub>2</sub>. This excitation results in the prompt dissociation of 
the complex giving rise to products C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>+O+O when the energy of exciting quantum is higher 
than the complex photodissociation threshold, which is found to be 41740 &plusmn; 200 cm<sup>&minus;1</sup> 
(239.6&plusmn;1.2 nm). This last threshold corresponds to the photodissociation giving rise to an unexcited 
isoprene molecule. The second channel, with threshold shifted to the blue by 1480 &plusmn; 280 cm<sup>&minus;1</sup>, 
corresponds to dissociation with formation of rovibrationally excited isoprene. A third channel was observed at 
wavelengths up to 243 nm with excitation below the upper photodissociation threshold. This channel is attributed 
to dissociation with the formation of a bound O atom C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> + 
<em>hv</em> &rarr; C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub>(<sup>3</sup>&Delta;<sub>u</sub>) &rarr; 
C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>O + O and/or to dissociation of O<sub>2</sub> with borrowing of the lacking energy 
from incompletely cooled complex internal degrees of freedom 
C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub><sup>*</sup>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> + <em>hv</em> &rarr; C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub><sup>*</sup>
&minus;O<sub>2</sub>(<sup>3</sup>&Delta;<sub>u</sub>) &rarr; C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub> + O + O. 
The kinetic energy of the O atoms arising in two other observed channels corresponds to O atoms produced by 
photodissociation of molecular oxygen in the excited a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub> and b1
&Sigma;+gb1&Sigma;g+ singlet states as the precursors. This indicates the formation of singlet oxygen O<sub>2</sub>
(a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub>) and O<sub>2</sub>(b1&Sigma;+gb1&Sigma;g+) after excitation of the 
C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> complex. Cooperative excitation of the complex with a simultaneous 
change of the spin of both partners <sup>1</sup>X&minus;<sup>3</sup>O<sub>2</sub> + <em>h&nu;</em> &rarr; <sup>3</sup>X
&minus;<sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub> &rarr; <sup>3</sup>X + <sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub> is suggested as a source of singlet 
oxygen O<sub>2</sub>(a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub>) and O<sub>2</sub>(b1&Sigma;+gb1&Sigma;g+). 
This cooperative excitation is in agreement with little or no vibrational excitation of O<sub>2</sub>(a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>
&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub>), produced from the C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> complex as studied 
in the current paper as well as from the C<sub>3</sub>H<sub>6</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> and CH<sub>3</sub>I&minus;
O<sub>2</sub> complexes reported 
in our previous paper [Baklanov <em>et al.</em>, J. Chem. Phys. <strong>126</strong>, 124316 (2007)]. 
The formation of O<sub>2</sub>(a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub>) from C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;
O<sub>2</sub> was observed at <em>&lambda;</em><sub>pump</sub> = 213&ndash;277 nm with the yield going down 
towards the long wavelength edge of this interval. This spectral profile is interpreted as the red-side wing 
of the band of a cooperative transition <sup>1</sup>X&minus;<sup>3</sup>O<sub>2</sub> + 
<em>h&nu;</em> &rarr; <sup>3</sup>X(T<sub>2</sub>)&minus;<sup>1</sup>O<sub>2</sub>(a&thinsp;<sup>1</sup>
&Delta;<sub><em>g</em></sub>) in the C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>8</sub>&minus;O<sub>2</sub> complex.
